A denizen of #cdda on Freenode recently observed that paying attention
to birds was important; I noted that this advice had been remarked on
some number of years ago:

  22. The rising of birds in their flight is the sign of an ambuscade.
      [Chang Yu's explanation is doubtless right: "When birds that are
      flying along in a straight line suddenly shoot upwards, it means
      that soldiers are in ambush at the spot beneath."]

and 

  32. If birds gather on any spot, it is unoccupied. [A useful fact to
      bear in mind when, for instance, as Ch`en Hao says, the enemy has
      secretly abandoned his camp.]

which are from a translation of Sun Tzu's "The Art of War"[1]. Now, I
will be the first to admit that while there are differences between the
realities of massed chariot warfare in ancient China and a simulated
Zombie Cataclysm, most of the advice from Sun Tzu remains relevant.

Birds in "Cataclysm: Dark Days Ahead" will typically flee away from the
player. Now, CDDA has z-levels so birds do not flee upwards as they did
and still do in this world, but should they be seen fleeing at
distance, especially if fleeing towards the player, there's a good bet
they are fleeing from something the player cannot (yet) see. Another
sign is when they bunch together into a knot; this indicates that they
are boxed in by the conflicting goals of fleeing from the player and
something a bit further on. This is more typical in towns where
buildings block orthogonal paths away from the threats, or that there
are zombies in the non-player directions away from the birds (also
typical in a town). A closer approach to the boxed birds will indicate
whether the box is complete or if there is a more open line the birds
then prefer to move to.

Towns meanwhile that have birds and other wildlife simply hanging around
indicate the area is clear of threats, or that any threats are already
off chasing something else; dogs, mi-go, gracken, krecks, and other such
spawns attract zombies. So, the (probably emergent) behavior of birds in
CDDA gives the player much the same intelligence a Chinese general might
have used 2,500 years ago, or that a scout for an army in the future
will still make use of.

A good player in Cataclysm will thus note the motion of the birds and
other such wildlife, and plan accordingly; the sudden appearance of a
fox from a nearby alley might indicate that there is a Zombie conga line
behind them, and that an immediate retreat is advisable so that anything
pulled by that fox is less likely to turn its attention directly onto
the player; the player will hopefully already be at a distance suitable
for yet more retreat or to engage, depending. Idle birds can be
approached as that area is probably safe, and their flight away observed
for deviations; any deviations point to some threat that may need to be
scouted laterally or could be approached directly depending on the
player, their combat skills, resources available, the time (the line of
sight differs markedly for some creatures between day and night, and
evolved zombies have capabilities not seen in early spawns) and the
particulars of the map (what monsters are expected to spawn, buildings
and other such obstacles, etc).

There is much more relevant advice in the "The Art of War" for players:
the use of fire, managing resources, taking favorable terrain, and
employing (if something of a stretch) spies which in CDDA take the form
of remote robot vehicles. Game developers could likewise make use of the
text; flooding opponents with a stream, or giving morale boosts to the
army should the commander not leave an easy escape route to save their
own hide with should things go awry (or a morale penalty when they do),
and so forth.

[1] The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Art of War, by Sun Tzu.
    [eBook #132]
